---
layout: post
title: "Computer Game Development Project"
date: 2019-01-29
---

## Intro
This module involved creating a Game Engine for the first peice of coursework and then using that engine to create a game. The engine had to have multiple subsystems like Graphics, Physics, Input, FileIO, etc. It also needed to use middleware for some of the subsystems that we would then work with to create a layer between that and the game. Another thing that the engine had to do would be to generate the levels using data input from a file or procedural generation.

## Middleware Used:
Middleware/Libraries used to build the game engine:
* Box2D: This was used as the physics engine. As it is a 2D game I was making, I used a 2D physics engine.
* NCLGL: This was used to as the graphics engine for the project. This is a library built using openGL and is Newcastle University's own graphics framework.
* XInput: Allowed for the use of adding XBox 360 controller support into the engine.
* FMOD: This was the audio library I used for adding and playing audio effects in game.
* GLText: This was the text library that I used for displaying text in an OpenGL window.
* SOIL: A library for loading textures in OpenGL


## Engine
For the engine I had to decide on what middleware I wanted to used in the project. From there I had to plug all that middleware in and then build a wrapper and some higher level API to use as the engine for this project. I set out the project having a project for each subsystem and then a project for the main game code. Each subsystem was connected by an event system which would send an event from a subsystem that would then be received by another subsystem. The event system lived in the Common subsystem/project as this is where code that was to be used by every subsystem lived. The Common project also involved the GameObject class. I also built a profiler into the engine to see what the frametimes of each subsystem were, the total time to handle that frame and the FPS that the game is running at.


## Game
The second part of this coursework was to build a game with the engine that we had built. The game I decided to make was similar to how the dungeons in Legend of Zelda are handled. So the gameplay was slightly similar to the older 2D Legend of Zelda games. 

The game mostly data driven as it would read in a game file which told the engine how many levels there were, where textures were stored and where the level information is. The level files then told the engine information about the GameObjects to put in the world and what texture that GameObject uses. The texture file just told the engine all the texture that needed to be read in by the engine and then gave them a label which would go in the texture part of the level file for a GameObject. This meant the engine only had to read in a texture once and not many times for each object.


## What To Improve
* The event system was a bit of a mess in terms of code because there was many for loops and if statements deciding what event did what. This could be a lot better optimised, and I will probably improve this with a lambda function event system.
* The Physics subsystem needs a lot more work as collision detection is a bit off. 
* Probably a big restructure of the whole engine needs to happen.
* A memory manager needs to be added to optimise memory management as memory is allocated and freed throughout the whole engine. Memory pools in a memory management subsystem would help optimise this engine.

## What I Learnt
I learnt a lot during this project:
* It taught me a lot about how I should structure a game engine and how games development works.
* I learnt a lot more about working with middleware and how to change the code in that middleware to suit the needs of my engine.
* The project also allowed me to learn more about making the engine more data driven.

## Video
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/RqawSYao4lI" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
